---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Reflection on Coding Standards"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-09-26
published: true
labels:
  - Software Industry Practice
---

#The Significance of Coding Standards in Software Development
Coding standards are often dismissed as minor details—things like how many spaces to indent or where to place curly braces. At first glance, they may seem more like rules for the sake of neatness than something that impacts the deeper aspects of coding. However, after reflecting on my recent experiences, I’ve started to recognize that coding standards might play a more significant role in software development than I initially thought. They aren’t just about making the code look nice; they set a foundation for creating software that is maintainable, understandable, and easier to work on as part of a team. This week gave me a clearer sense of why these seemingly small details might actually make a big difference in the quality of the code we write.

Over the past week, my experience using ESLint with Visual Studio Code (VSCode) brought this realization into sharper focus. At first, the process felt cumbersome—almost like trying to assemble a puzzle using chopsticks. I often found myself questioning why I was struggling to adapt to this new way of working. I’ve always enjoyed coding for its analytical and problem-solving nature, but ESLint introduced an entirely new layer of structure, one that felt unfamiliar and, at times, overwhelming. The necessity to clean up every warning and error was initially frustrating, and I couldn’t shake the feeling that I was out of my element. However, as I reflected more deeply, I began to understand that this friction was a crucial part of learning.

One of the most eye-opening insights from this week came from my professor, Dan Port, who shifted my perspective on coding standards. In today's industry, technical proficiency is not necessarily the most valuable skill. AI tools are increasingly adept at solving coding problems, especially simple ones. What truly matters, and what coding standards enforce, is an organized, clean, and team-friendly approach to software development. The way code interacts with computers, servers, and databases requires more than just solving problems; it demands structured thinking, foresight, and the ability to collaborate effectively in a team. Clean, readable, and standardized code is not just easier to debug and maintain—it’s essential for success in modern software engineering.

Looking back, I’m grateful for the challenge I faced with ESLint, even though it was uncomfortable. It forced me to confront my weaknesses—particularly my struggles with integrated development environments (IDEs) and version control through GitHub. These tools, much like coding standards, are designed to foster collaboration and improve efficiency in professional environments. Although I felt out of my comfort zone, this week has underscored the importance of embracing coding standards, not as an obstacle, but as a pathway toward becoming a more effective and adaptable developer. Moving forward, I am eager to refine my understanding of these tools and standards, knowing that they are critical for my growth as both an individual coder and a member of any future development team.

